ROADMAP.md, before:

# LDAPie Project Roadmap

## Project Status (May 2025)

LDAPie is a modern LDAP client command-line interface tool inspired by HTTPie's user-friendly approach. It provides a rich, colorful terminal interface for LDAP operations using the ldap3 library for LDAP functionality and Rich for beautiful terminal output.

The project has implemented all core features including comprehensive LDAP operations, multiple output formats, and an interactive mode. This roadmap consolidates information from all planning documents to provide a comprehensive overview of the project's current state and future directions.

## Project Structure

```text
ldapie/
├── src/                      # Source code
│   ├── ldapcli.py            # Main CLI application
│   ├── ldapcli_utils.py      # Utility functions
│   └── rich_formatter.py     # Custom Rich formatting for CLI help
├── tests/                    # Tests
│   ├── demo.py               # Demo script with mock LDAP server
│   ├── mock_ldap.py          # Mock LDAP server implementation
│   └── test_ldapcli_utils.py # Tests for utility functions
├── Dockerfile                # Docker container definition
├── LICENSE                   # GPL v3 license
├── Makefile                  # Build and development tasks
├── README.md                 # User documentation
├── ROADMAP.md                # Project roadmap and planning
├── completion.zsh            # Shell completion
├── ldapie                    # Python wrapper script
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
└── setup.py                  # Package installation
```

## Implemented Features

### Core Features

- [x] **Modern, Colorful Interface**
  - [x] Syntax highlighting and color-coded output
  - [x] Visual formatting for complex LDAP data
  - [x] Light and dark theme support

- [x] **Demo Mode**
  - [x] Automated demonstration with mock LDAP server
  - [x] Non-interactive demo flow showing all features
  - [x] Accessible via `--demo` option in main script and wrapper scripts
  - [x] Educational introduction to tool capabilities

- [x] **Multiple Output Formats**
  - [x] Default beautiful rich text format
  - [x] JSON output
  - [x] LDIF output
  - [x] CSV output
  - [x] Tree-based hierarchical view

- [x] **Comprehensive Commands**
  - [x] `search`: Perform LDAP searches with flexible options
  - [x] `info`: Display LDAP server information
  - [x] `compare`: Compare two LDAP entries
  - [x] `schema`: View LDAP schema information
  - [x] `add`: Create new LDAP entries with attributes
  - [x] `modify`: Update existing entries with add/replace/delete operations
  - [x] `delete`: Remove entries with optional recursive deletion
  - [x] `rename`: Change entry names or move them in the directory tree

- [x] **Flexible Connection Options**
  - [x] Anonymous and authenticated connections
  - [x] SSL/TLS support
  - [x] Custom port specification
  - [x] Connection timeout settings
  - [x] Secure password handling

- [x] **Rich Output Controls**
  - [x] Save results to files
  - [x] Paged result handling for large result sets
  - [x] Filtering by specific attributes
  - [x] Various search scopes (base, one, subtree)

- [x] **Container Support**
  - [x] Dockerized application

- [x] **Developer Experience**
  - [x] **Shell completion**
  - [x] Zsh completion implementation
  - [x] Bash completion implementation  
  - [x] Fish completion implementation
  - [x] Comprehensive documentation
  - [x] Modular code structure

### Interactive Mode

- [x] Implemented a full-featured interactive terminal UI:
  - [x] Command-line interface similar to shell
  - [x] Directory navigation with base DN setting
  - [x] Search capabilities with result viewing
  - [x] Full LDAP operations support
  - [x] Schema browsing
  - [x] Connection management
  - [x] Command history and help system

## Upcoming Work

### Package Distribution

- [x] Complete PyPI packaging and distribution
- [x] Create automated release workflow
  - [x] Enhanced with multi-platform Docker builds
  - [x] Added comprehensive testing across Python versions
  - [x] Improved changelog management
  - [x] Added release artifacts generation
  - [x] Implemented notification system
- [x] Add installation instructions using pip
- [ ] Create distribution packages (deb, rpm)

### Additional Features

- [ ] Create richer interactive TUI with panels and forms
- [ ] Add tab completion in interactive mode
- [ ] Implement template-based entry creation
- [ ] Password change operations
- [ ] Query history
- [x] **Implement context-sensitive help system**
  - [x] Create help context manager to track user state and history
  - [x] Build command analyzer with intent detection and error recognition
  - [x] Develop suggestion engine for contextual recommendations
  - [x] Add `--validate` flag for command dry-run and preview
  - [x] Implement "Did you mean...?" corrections for mistyped commands
  - [x] Add progressive disclosure in help (basic to detailed)
  - [x] Enable help overlay with '?' after partial commands
  - [x] Provide smart suggestions based on current operation context

### Testing and Quality

- [x] Add more unit tests for new functionality
- [x] Create integration tests with mock LDAP server
- [ ] Add type checking with mypy
- [x] Set up CI/CD pipeline

### Container Distribution

- [x] Create container images for various platforms
- [x] Add container usage documentation

## Project Timeline

### Phase 1: Core Functionality (Completed)

- [x] Basic LDAP operations (search, info, compare, schema)
- [x] Multiple output formats
- [x] Connection handling and authentication
- [x] Shell completion

### Phase 2: Extended Operations (Completed)

- [x] CRUD operations (add, modify, delete, rename)
- [x] Interactive mode
- [x] Improved error handling
- [x] Enhanced documentation

### Phase 3: Distribution & Advanced Features (Current)

- [x] PyPI packaging
- [x] Container distribution
- [ ] Certificate & SASL authentication
- [ ] Tab completion in interactive mode
- [ ] Template system for entry creation

### Phase 4: Enterprise Features (Planned)

- [ ] LDAP replication monitoring
- [ ] Performance analysis
- [ ] Batch operations
- [ ] Configuration management
- [ ] Extended security features

## Recent Improvements (May 2025)

- [x] Added `--demo` option to the main CLI tool for running the automated demo
  - Integrated with Python wrapper for consistent experience
  - User can now run demos directly from the main tool
  - Improved demo educational experience

- [x] Enhanced help output with rich formatting
  - Created custom Rich formatter for Click commands
  - Applied consistent styling to all command help outputs
  - Improved readability with colorized sections and better layout
  - Consistent experience across all command help pages

- [x] Refactored code structure for better organization
  - Created dedicated rich_formatter.py for handling formatted output
  - Improved code modularity
  - Better separation of concerns

## Next Steps

1. [ ] Begin PyPI packaging and complete automated tests
2. [ ] Enhance interactive mode with tab completion
3. [ ] Add support for additional authentication methods
4. [ ] Set up CI/CD pipeline for automated releases

Commit message:

Add type checking support with mypy and update related configurations (#17)
- Integrate mypy for static type checking in the CI/CD workflow.
- Update Makefile to include a typecheck command.
- Enhance documentation with type checking instructions.
- Add mypy configuration to pyproject.toml and create mypy.ini.
- Update requirements.txt to include mypy and its types.
- Mark completed tasks in ROADMAP.md related to type checking.

ROADMAP.md, after:

# LDAPie Project Roadmap

## Project Status (May 2025)

LDAPie is a modern LDAP client command-line interface tool inspired by HTTPie's user-friendly approach. It provides a rich, colorful terminal interface for LDAP operations using the ldap3 library for LDAP functionality and Rich for beautiful terminal output.

The project has implemented all core features including comprehensive LDAP operations, multiple output formats, and an interactive mode. This roadmap consolidates information from all planning documents to provide a comprehensive overview of the project's current state and future directions.

## Project Structure

```text
ldapie/
├── src/                      # Source code
│   ├── ldapcli.py            # Main CLI application
│   ├── ldapcli_utils.py      # Utility functions
│   └── rich_formatter.py     # Custom Rich formatting for CLI help
├── tests/                    # Tests
│   ├── demo.py               # Demo script with mock LDAP server
│   ├── mock_ldap.py          # Mock LDAP server implementation
│   └── test_ldapcli_utils.py # Tests for utility functions
├── Dockerfile                # Docker container definition
├── LICENSE                   # GPL v3 license
├── Makefile                  # Build and development tasks
├── README.md                 # User documentation
├── ROADMAP.md                # Project roadmap and planning
├── completion.zsh            # Shell completion
├── ldapie                    # Python wrapper script
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
└── setup.py                  # Package installation
```

## Implemented Features

### Core Features

- [x] **Modern, Colorful Interface**
  - [x] Syntax highlighting and color-coded output
  - [x] Visual formatting for complex LDAP data
  - [x] Light and dark theme support

- [x] **Demo Mode**
  - [x] Automated demonstration with mock LDAP server
  - [x] Non-interactive demo flow showing all features
  - [x] Accessible via `--demo` option in main script and wrapper scripts
  - [x] Educational introduction to tool capabilities

- [x] **Multiple Output Formats**
  - [x] Default beautiful rich text format
  - [x] JSON output
  - [x] LDIF output
  - [x] CSV output
  - [x] Tree-based hierarchical view

- [x] **Comprehensive Commands**
  - [x] `search`: Perform LDAP searches with flexible options
  - [x] `info`: Display LDAP server information
  - [x] `compare`: Compare two LDAP entries
  - [x] `schema`: View LDAP schema information
  - [x] `add`: Create new LDAP entries with attributes
  - [x] `modify`: Update existing entries with add/replace/delete operations
  - [x] `delete`: Remove entries with optional recursive deletion
  - [x] `rename`: Change entry names or move them in the directory tree

- [x] **Flexible Connection Options**
  - [x] Anonymous and authenticated connections
  - [x] SSL/TLS support
  - [x] Custom port specification
  - [x] Connection timeout settings
  - [x] Secure password handling

- [x] **Rich Output Controls**
  - [x] Save results to files
  - [x] Paged result handling for large result sets
  - [x] Filtering by specific attributes
  - [x] Various search scopes (base, one, subtree)

- [x] **Container Support**
  - [x] Dockerized application

- [x] **Developer Experience**
  - [x] **Shell completion**
  - [x] Zsh completion implementation
  - [x] Bash completion implementation  
  - [x] Fish completion implementation
  - [x] Comprehensive documentation
  - [x] Modular code structure

### Interactive Mode

- [x] Implemented a full-featured interactive terminal UI:
  - [x] Command-line interface similar to shell
  - [x] Directory navigation with base DN setting
  - [x] Search capabilities with result viewing
  - [x] Full LDAP operations support
  - [x] Schema browsing
  - [x] Connection management
  - [x] Command history and help system

## Upcoming Work

### Package Distribution

- [x] Complete PyPI packaging and distribution
- [x] Create automated release workflow
  - [x] Enhanced with multi-platform Docker builds
  - [x] Added comprehensive testing across Python versions
  - [x] Improved changelog management
  - [x] Added release artifacts generation
  - [x] Implemented notification system
- [x] Add installation instructions using pip
- [ ] Create distribution packages (deb, rpm)

### Additional Features

- [ ] Create richer interactive TUI with panels and forms
- [x] Add tab completion in interactive mode
- [ ] Implement template-based entry creation
- [ ] Password change operations
- [x] Query history
- [x] **Implement context-sensitive help system**
  - [x] Create help context manager to track user state and history
  - [x] Build command analyzer with intent detection and error recognition
  - [x] Develop suggestion engine for contextual recommendations
  - [x] Add `--validate` flag for command dry-run and preview
  - [x] Implement "Did you mean...?" corrections for mistyped commands
  - [x] Add progressive disclosure in help (basic to detailed)
  - [x] Enable help overlay with '?' after partial commands
  - [x] Provide smart suggestions based on current operation context

### Testing and Quality

- [x] Add more unit tests for new functionality
- [x] Create integration tests with mock LDAP server
- [x] Add type checking with mypy
  - [x] Configure mypy settings in mypy.ini and pyproject.toml
  - [x] Add type checking command to Makefile
  - [x] Create TYPING.md documentation with guidance
- [x] Set up CI/CD pipeline

### Container Distribution

- [x] Create container images for various platforms
- [x] Add container usage documentation

## Project Timeline

### Phase 1: Core Functionality (Completed)

- [x] Basic LDAP operations (search, info, compare, schema)
- [x] Multiple output formats
- [x] Connection handling and authentication
- [x] Shell completion

### Phase 2: Extended Operations (Completed)

- [x] CRUD operations (add, modify, delete, rename)
- [x] Interactive mode
- [x] Improved error handling
- [x] Enhanced documentation

### Phase 3: Distribution & Advanced Features (Current)

- [x] PyPI packaging
- [x] Container distribution
- [ ] Template system for entry creation

## Recent Improvements (May 2025)

- [x] Added `--demo` option to the main CLI tool for running the automated demo
  - Integrated with Python wrapper for consistent experience
  - User can now run demos directly from the main tool
  - Improved demo educational experience

- [x] Enhanced help output with rich formatting
  - Created custom Rich formatter for Click commands
  - Applied consistent styling to all command help outputs
  - Improved readability with colorized sections and better layout
  - Consistent experience across all command help pages

- [x] Refactored code structure for better organization
  - Created dedicated rich_formatter.py for handling formatted output
  - Improved code modularity
  - Better separation of concerns
